
--- Page 1 ---
CricketTHE ROYAL MARINES


--- Page 2 ---
2
Student Notes                                      Teacher NotesCONTENTS
Prepared for The Royal Navy in Association with The National Cricket
Association and produced by Education & Youth Ltd, London.
If there is any support you feel The Royal Navy can give regarding this
project please contact 0870 333 0423.
Acknowledgements
These notes have been compiled by Bob Carter – National Coach,
(Coach Education) The National Cricket Association
Technical Editor: P Edwards M.A.MESSAGE FROM THE NATIONAL CRICKET ASSOCIATION 3
INTRODUCTION TO THE MODULE 3
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT SHEET 4UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION TO CRICKET MODULE 5
UNIT 2 TECHNIQUES AND SKILLS 6
1 FIELDING 6
2 BOWLING 9
3 BATTING 144 WICKET KEEPING 22
UNIT 3 TACTICS AND FIELD PLACEMENT 25
UNIT 4 UMPIRING 28
UNIT 5 PHYSICAL CONDITIONING FOR CRICKET 30
UNIT 6 HISTORY OF CRICKET 34UNIT 7 THE COMPETITIVE STRUCTURE OF THE SPORT. 35
UNIT 8 USEFUL INFORMATION 36

--- Page 3 ---
3
Method:
Teachers should provide:
- encouragement, support and motivation to students studying this
module
- access to facilities for practice and also suitable for the game
bearing in mind the ability of the players
- the opportunity for students to discuss and study any topics not
fully covered in the module due to lack of space, e.g. advanced
techniques, the Laws etc.Introduction to the Module
Module Objectives:
After completing the Module students should be able:
- to understand the basic principles of the skills of the game,
tactics, field placement and umpiring signals
- to apply this knowledge to improve their performance and
enjoyment in both practice and the game
- to discuss the development of the game in recent times.Message from The National Cricket Association
The National Cricket Association, founded in 1968 has several
objectives, two of which are especially relevant with reference to this
publication.
They are as follows:- to encourage the playing of cricket in accordance with the Laws of
Cricket and in the best traditions of Sportsmanship;
- to administer a coaching scheme on a national basis on behalf of
the Cricket Council.
The National Coaching Scheme is highly regarded by all cricketing
nations as being in the vanguard of educational and coaching methods
at all levels. Additionally, two separate Proficiency Award tests are run
and administered by the NCA for primary and secondary schoolchildren.
This instruction booklet is intended as a basic guide to students in
secondary schools wishing to follow the basic GCSE or equivalentcourse as set out in the syllabi by the various examining boards.
However, anyone wishing to delve deeper into this subject should
consult the list of books for recommended reading, or if over the ageof 18, consider enrolling on a locally run Coaching Award Course.
Further information on the latest educational and coaching ideas are
published in ‘Cricket Coach’,  the journal of the Association of CricketCoaches, or in ‘Cricket World’, an independent publication which
provides a forum for NCA official policy and news.

--- Page 4 ---
4
The beginning stage of learning cricket is the exploratory phase, where
the player is attempting to learn the correct sequence of movementsof all the basic skills e.g. Batting, bowling, fielding.  A number of
errors may be made and players will require feedback to recognise
and correct these errors.
During the intermediate stage a player will perform more consistently.
Timing and anticipation will improve, although skills may break down
under the pressure of a game situation.
At the advanced stage all the basic skills are automatic and a player
will concentrate on more detailed aspects of the skill and the tactics
required in the game eg. Position of fielders.Skills Development Sheet
Name of Module Cricket
Basic Skills Fielding, bowling, batting, wicket keeping (pages 6-24)
Game-play Skills Good basic skills, techniques. A good understanding of the basic principles
and tactics. Ability to vary strokes and bowling techniques. Demonstrates
good concentration and alertness in the field (pages 6-24)
Tactical Skills Bowling: Encouraging dangerous strokes. Varying pace, flight, length,
spin and width of crease.
Batsmen: Judgement and decision making; looking for gaps in the
field; noting ability of fielders and exploiting weaknesses.
Fielders: Placing to
1) Catch batters
2) Stop runs. Adjusting field according to batter (pages 25-27)
Training Skills Aerobic endurance, anaerobic endurance, flexibility (pages 30-33)Rules “The Laws of Cricket” can be obtained from the MCC. Address page 36.

--- Page 5 ---
5
UNIT 1
Introduction to Cricket Module
Cricket is a game steeped in tradition, in which it is often how you play
the game that is as important as winning. The expression “That’s not
cricket” embodied the ideal of “fair play” and good sportsmanshipwhich teachers and coaches should endeavour to foster at all levels.
There are may different levels of the game ranging from the Five Day
Test Match, the afternoon club match, the indoor six a side adults,Kwik Cricket, Cricket Pairs game played by 10 year olds to the
simplest single wicket game of one bowler and one batsman. Each
require different degrees of ability, fitness, skills and commitment.Early exposure to the skills required is a great help in the making of a
successful player, though some players have turned to the game at a
later age and achieved a good standard.
Learning the skills can be a very enjoyable experience with a great deal
of physical activity involved. It is also possible to structure the skill
learning so that simple competitions and small sided games preventthe practices from becoming boring. They also provide opportunities
of introducing to beginners, in stages, small sections of the 42 Laws
governing the playing of the adult game.
The material covered in this book does not relate to any specific
Examination Board’s syllabus, but is intended to provide a 
basic
resource which should be supported and supplemented by reference
to the texts listed in Recommended Reading.

--- Page 6 ---
6
Figure 1
Figure 2UNIT 2
Techniques and Skills
In order to play cricket to examination level, students should have a
good practical and theoretical grasp of the 4 major activities of the
game:
• Fielding
• Bowling
• Batting
• Wicket keeping
1 Fielding
Essentially this involves catching and throwing in a variety of
circumstances both static or on the move.
CATCHING
The High Catch
Objective: To catch a ball which is dropping quickly.
Method: Sight the ball.
Move quickly to where it will come down.Stand still with hands up above eye level and palms facing
ball, fingers spread out, little fingers touching.
Hands “give” as ball is caught.
Finish close to chest (see Figure 1).
The Skim Catch
Objective: Primarily to catch a flat trajectory ball arriving about head
high.
Method: Sight the ball, palms facing ball, fingers pointing upwards,
thumbs touching.
Hands give as ball is caught.If ball is caught directly in front of head, move head to side
as hands give (see Figure 2).


--- Page 7 ---
7
Figure 3
Figure 4INTERCEPTING AND RETURNING
The Long Barrier and Throw
Objective: The long barrier is used to ensure
the ball is stopped.
Method: Head on line of ball.
Left knee on ground, overlapping
right heel.
Palms facing ball, fingers pointing
down.
Holding ball in right hand, stand up taking a
pace towards target with left foot.
Aim with left arm.
Weight on back foot which is at right angles to
line of throw.
Throw ball; follow-through over left leg with
right arm and right leg (see Figure 4).The Close Catch
Objective: Primarily to deal with catches close to the wicket.
Method: Eyes level.
Head still.Palms facing anticipated line of ball.
Fingers pointing down, elbows clear of body.
Weight on balls of feet.
Hands give as ball is caught (see Figure 3).


--- Page 8 ---
8
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 7CHASING AND RETRIEVING
The Short Throw
Objective: Run inside line of ball to enable right foot to land beside it.
Method: Weight well back. Head over right knee, left foot trailing.Pick ball up.
Turn to left into throwing position.
Aim and throw without further steps (see Figure 5).
(If the ball is moving quickly it may be necessary to take
several braking strides before turning and throwing.)
The Long Throw
Objective: To retrieve a ball after picking up near
the boundary.
Method: Ensure left foot is forward alongside
ball.
Bend down keeping seat well back.
Pick ball up.
Push hard on left foot.
Turn to left, fling left arm into aiming
position and throw (see Figure 6).
Throwing on the Turn
NB This is an advanced technique, used to prevent
runs, or to secure a run out.
Method: Run inside line of ball.
Pick up ball alongside right foot.Step onto left foot.
Jump, turning in the air.
Aim at target with left arm.
Throw while still in the air (see Figure 7).


--- Page 9 ---
9
Figure 8
Figure 9Step 1
Bowling from the Coil Position
Objective: To introduce the bowling action to beginners.
Method: Raise front arm. Look over shoulder. Bowling hand across
chest.
Lean back. Lift front knee. Arch back slightly. Look down
intended line of delivery.
Swing bowling arm downwards and then backwards.
Swing front arm forwards. Stamp down with front foot.
Continue rotation of arms. Keep front arm close to body.
Straighten front leg. Keep head upright. Release ball as arm
passes head. Keep hand behind ball.
Swing front arm high behind body. Follow-through with
bowling arm across body. Bring back leg through, bent and
close to other leg. Bowling shoulder points to target.
Follow-through by taking steps forward (see Figure 9).2 Bowling
The first essential of effective
bowling is that the studentadopts the correct grip (see
Figure 8).
THE BASIC GRIP
Method: Seam vertical.Thumb on edge of
seam; first two
fingers slightly apart;
third finger bent andsupporting ball (see
Figure 8).
Having achieved this, the whole
skill should be introduced in a
simplified form, using the
following steps.General points for fielders
Expect every ball to come to you but do not anticipate its line,
height or speed.
All fielders except close catchers should be moving in towards
the striker as the bowler delivers the ball.
Slips, leg slip and wicketkeeper can watch the ball from the
bowler’s hand; others watch the bat.
Sight the ball before moving off in a particular direction; then
move quickly.
Whenever possible use two hands and get some part of the body
behind the ball unless this action would prevent a run out.
Having fielded a ball, throw it immediately to the wicketkeeper or,
if there is a chance of a run out, at the stumps.If not fielding the ball, back up at either end to reduce
the chance of over-throws.
If you are close to the bowler’s wicket and he cannot get
back to it, move to it to take the return.
Concentrate all the time, keeping an eye on your captain
who may wish to move you.
If there is a possibility of two fielders colliding when
going for the same ball the nearest should call ‘mine’ orthe captain should shout the name of the player who is
to field the ball.
On cold days keep your muscles and hands warm to
prevent injury and to be ready for instant action.

--- Page 10 ---
10
Figure 10
Figure 11
Figure 12
Step 2
Run Up and Bound
Method: Concentrate on line of delivery.Smooth rhythmical approach.Accelerate gradually. Control speed.
Bound (spring) off left foot. Raise both arms. Turn 90 ° in
air.
Land in coil position leaning back from batsman.
Repeat bowling action.Practise bowling with a smooth and economical run-up and
easy rhythmical well balanced delivery, finishing with a
deliberate and fluent follow-through (see Figure 10).
Once players have mastered these steps they should be ready to
progress to more complex skills using swing and spin.
THE OUTSWING OR AWAY SWING
NB To do this it is essential that the ball used has a good seam.
The Grip
Method: Seam vertical but pointing at slips.
Side of thumb on centre seam. First two fingers either side
of seam.
Polished side of ball to leg side (see Figure 11).
The Action
Method: Bowl from close to stumps.
Look over front shoulder behind
front arm.
Back foot parallel with crease.
Front foot lands to leg side of
back foot.
High delivery, hand behind ball.Emphasise good follow-through
of bowling arm and shoulder
(see Figure 12).

--- Page 11 ---
11
Figure 14Figure 13
THE IN-SWING
The Grip
Method : Hold the ball with the polished side
on the off side.
Seam vertical but pointing to leg
side.
Ball of thumb against seam.
First two fingers close together on
seam (see Figure 13).
The Action
Method: Bowl from wider position on crease.
Open coil - more chest on.
Look inside arm. Back foot points
down pitch.
Front foot in line with or outside
back foot. High bowling arm on
release.
Feel as though pushing ball to
legside.
Bowling arm does not follow-
through across body (see Figure
14).

--- Page 12 ---
12
Figure 15
Figure 16
OFF SPIN AND LEFT ARM ORTHODOX
SPIN (FINGER SPIN)
NB An off break spins the ball from off to
leg, rotating clockwise from the bowler. Theleft arm spinner moves the ball from leg to
off.
The Grip
Method: Hold ball in between first and
second fingers.
Seam at right angles to the
fingers.
Top joints across seam.
Knuckles of first finger and
second finger grip seam.
Do not use thumb to hold ball
(see Figure 15).
The Action
Method: Shortish run up.Good coil position; look behind
arm. Short delivery stride.
Front foot slightly across to leg
side.
High delivery, head up.
Pivot on ball of front foot.
Twist hand clockwise.Flick ball with first finger.
Pull bowling arm across the
body.
Spin ball clockwise by turning
hand upwards.
Finish with palm upwards (see
Figure 16).

--- Page 13 ---
13
Figure 17
Figure 18
LEG SPIN OR CHINAMAN
NB A legbreak spins from leg to off, rotating anti-clockwise from
bowler. A left arm wrist spinner rotates the ball clockwise and is said
to bowl ‘Chinamen’.
The Grip
Method: Seam at right angles to fingers.First two fingers spread; first joints on seam.
Third finger bent along seam (see Figure 17).
The Action
Method: Shortish run up.
Good coil position.
Look over shoulder.
Wrist bent in towards forearm.
Place front foot to leg side of back
foot.
Keep head up.
High delivery.
Hold wrist back.
Pivot around front foot.Flick wrist forward.
Pull down with first finger.
Straighten third finger.
Flick third finger straight as ball is
released.
Continue across body, palm
downwards (see Figure 18).
CUTTERS – FLOATER – GOOGLY
Within a work of this size, it is impossible to cover the
advanced stages of bowling, although it is acknowledged
that some GCSE or equivalent syllabi demand that theseare included. Further information regarding these skills is
to be found by reference to the texts listed in
Recommended Reading.

--- Page 14 ---
14
Figure 19
Figure 20
Figure 21
3 Batting
Please note, throughout the module “batsman” also refers to
“batswoman”.
Batting in cricket is probably the most popular of all skills. Firstly, it
allows the player to score, and secondly he has the full attention of notonly both teams, but also the spectators.
When teaching batting it is essential that staff exercise great care in
selecting the surface on which the skill is performed. At school levelthis is often a factor over which neither staff nor students have any
control. Nevertheless, staff should remain on the side of caution and
on bad pitches certain strokes should 
not be taught. It is accepted that
at least one Examining Board includes the hook within the syllabus.
The National Cricket Association (NCA) does not recommend that this
stroke be taught to inexperienced players, particularly if the pitch issuspect. For this reason the hook and other advanced skills (lofted
shots, the sweep and the late cut) are omitted from this text.
BATTING SKILLS – THE BASIC ELEMENTS
The Grip
Method: Hands close together towards top of handle.
Top hand gripping very firmly.
Fingers and thumbs of both hands around handle.
V’s formed by thumb and forefinger are in line
approximately half way between splice and outside edge of
bat (see Figure 19).
The Stance
Method: Feet slightly apart.Knees slightly flexed, weight evenly distributed on balls of
feet – not heels.
Eyes level and square to line of delivery.
Toe of bat on ground (see Figure 20).
THE BACKLIFT
Method: Front shoulder and elbow pointing to bowler.
Bat raised but pushed back over middle-stump.
Head still.
Open face of bat to point.
Top forearm roughly parallel with ground.
Back elbow away from body.No movement of body backwards or forwards until
selection of stroke to be played is made (see Figure 21).

--- Page 15 ---
15
Figure 22
Figure 23
THE BASIC SHOTS
The Pull
This stroke is played to a short pitched ball bouncing between knee
and chest height as it arrives at the batsman. This is known as a longhop.
When learning strokes, a firm level surface is required in order to
achieve an even predictable bounce from a tennis ball. Extreme caremust be taken to ensure that no batsman will hit a ball into an area
where others are working. Sufficient space must be allowed so that
individual batsmen do not strike any person from another group withthe bat. No fielder is allowed nearer than 10 paces from the batsman.
If practising inside, the batsman can strike the ball towards a wall and
the fielders can intercept the ball on the rebound from the wall at aposition nearer the striker but on the opposite side from the direction
in which the ball was struck.
Method: Start with high backlift.
Step back and
across, with both feet
square to the wicket.
Fix eyes on ball and
keep head still and
forward of body.
Hit ball at arm’s
length in line with
body.
Aim to hit ball in front
of square-leg and
downwards.
Transfer weight from
back to front leg (seeFigure 22).
Hitting a Full Toss to Leg
Objective: To play a ball which
does not bounce before
arriving at the batsman.
Method: High backlift.
Lean forward, head and
front shoulder leadingon to line of ball.
Fix eyes on ball.
Hit ball downwards at
arm’s length.
Aim in front of square-
leg.
Weight on front leg.
Keep looking at place
where contact was
made in order to keep
head still and maintainbalance (see Figure
23).

--- Page 16 ---
16
Figure 24
Figure 25Back Defensive Stroke
Objective: This stroke is played to a ball pitching short and
bouncing knee high or above.
Method: High back lift.
Step back and across towards off side if ball is on off
stump.
Back foot parallel with crease.
Back of front shoulder turned slightly.
Head on line of delivery.Weight on back foot.
Balance of body forward.
Front foot brought back naturally.
Relax bottom hand to finger and thumb grip.
Top hand in control.Ball is played under head.
Bat vertical but angled downwards so that ball is not
played upwards (see Figure 24).
The Forward Defence Stroke
Objective: To prevent a good length ball from hitting the wicket.The ball should not bounce as high as the knee.
Method: From a good straight backlift lead with head and frontshoulder onto the line of the ball.
Top hand in control.
Relax bottom hand to thumb and finger grip.
Front leg close to line of ball and bent at knee.
Ease back foot onto inside of foot; keep back leg
straight.
Do not follow-through.
Maintain a good balance by keeping head close to
front shoulder and over the bat (see Figure 25).

--- Page 17 ---
17
Figure 26
Figure 27
The Off Drive
Objective: To play to a half-volley, a ball which pitches
close to the batsman and does not bounce
very high. It will be just on or outside the offstump.
Method: From a good high backlift, lead with headand front shoulder onto line of ball.
Top hand in control.
Play ball under head close to bent front leg.
Do not lift head after contact.
Arms follow-through along line ball was
struck; top hand and elbow high.
Back leg straight; weight on front foot.
The wrist can now ‘break’ allowing the bat
to go over the shoulder, handle pointingroughly in direction of ball (see Figure 26).
The Straight Drive
Objective: To play to a half-volley which pitches
approximately on the line of the middle-
stump.
Method: In all ways similar to off drive but the lead
of head and front shoulder is straight down
the pitch.
The On Drive
Objective: This stroke is played to a half-volley, pitching
on or just outside the leg stump.
Method: Very similar to other drives.
Lead with head and front shoulder onto line
of ball.
Dip front shoulder while taking a shorter
stride than for other drives.
Throw hands and arms out along line ball is
intended to be struck.
Keep head close to shoulder. Top hand in
control all the time (see Figure 27).

--- Page 18 ---
18
Figure 28
Figure 29
The Forcing Stroke Off the Back Foot
Objective: This stroke is played to a ball short of a
length outside the off stump which does
not bounce more than about knee height.
Method: Essential to have a good high back lift.
Step back and slightly across to offside
just inside the line of ball.
Back foot parallel to crease.
Front shoulder turned slightly to off side.
Weight on back foot.
Head down.
Control downswing of bat with top hand.Allow front leg to move close to back leg.
Just before contact with ball punch
through with bottom hand.
Stop (check) swing of bat as shown,
keeping a high front elbow.
Keep looking at spot contact was made to
maintain balance and forward poise of
body (see Figure 28).
The Square Cut
Objective: This stroke is played to a short pitched
ball which passes wide of the off stump,ideally about waist high.
Method: High backlift.
Turn back of front shoulder to bowler.
Step back and across to off side with
back foot.
Hit down on the ball at arm’s length.
Watch ball carefully, making contact as it
is level with body.
Keep head well over back knee as bat
follows through.
Weight is on back foot (see Figure 29).

--- Page 19 ---
19
Figure 30
Figure 31
The Forward Leg Glance
Objective: This stroke is played to a good length or
slightly over pitched ball on or outside
the leg stump.
Method: Lead with head and front shoulder ontoline of ball.
Front foot lands in line with ball; top
hand in control.
Angle face of bat slightly to leg side.
Keep handle further forward than blade
to play ball down.
Maintain a good balance by keeping
head over front knee as ball is played
and afterwards.
Allow wrists to continue to turn as bat
follows through (see Figure 30).
The Backward Leg Glance
Objective: This stroke is played to a ball just short
of a length which is missing the legstump.
Method: Step back, allowing back foot to point tocover.
Head on line of ball.
Front foot taken back naturally.
Allow ball to come close.
Play ball down with angled bat, face
pointing to leg side.
Control stroke with top hand.
Wrists continue to turn as bat follows
through (see Figure 31).
For details and descriptions of more advanced
strokes reference should be made to
Recommended Reading.

--- Page 20 ---
20
Non striker’s callFigure 33
Figure 32
Running Between the Wickets
In order to score in cricket it is
necessary for the batsman to
run between the wickets. Whilethis may appear blatantly
obvious, there is nevertheless a
degree of judgement as well asphysical skill involved, and staff
are recommended to spend
some time on this topic withinthe time allotted to teaching and
practising batting.
Running between the wickets
involves 5 factors:
(1) Calling
(2) Deciding who makes the call
(3) Backing up
(4) Making one’s ground(5) Multiple runs
Calling
There are three calls:
Yes – when there is definitely a
run
No – when there is no chance
of a run
Wait – if unsure whether the
fielder can collect the
ball
Wait is always followed quickly
by either yes or no.
Whose Call
This depends on where the ball
has been struck. Generally if the
striker can see the ball easily itis his call. If it has gone behind
the striker it would be the non
striker’s call (see Figure 32).Either batsman may refuse to
run if he thinks he cannot makethe run, provided he does so
immediately.
Backing Up
The non-striker holds his bat
with the hand nearest thebowler. As the bowler
commences his delivery, the non
striker is moving towards hispartner, placing his bat just
inside the popping crease. He
watches the bowler deliver theball before leaving the crease
and moving down the pitch. Ifthe bowler does not deliver the
ball, he is able to remain within
his ground because the bat isgrounded behind the crease.
The non striker’s duty is to run
clear of the striker so that he
does not impede him if the
striker, due to the stroke he hasplayed, has to run on the same
side of the pitch (see Figure 33).

--- Page 21 ---
21
Figure 35Figure 34
Making One’s Ground
Always run the first run as fast as
possible. Aim to run the bat in
short of the popping crease sothat it  is grounded as it crosses
the crease (see Figure 34).
Multiple RunsWhen there is a possibility of
more than one run, the call is yes,
but as the batsmen pass eachother they should quietly suggest
the possibility: 
“Look for two”,
“Could be three”.
Ground the bat in either left or
right hand so that the turn can be
made facing the direction inwhich the ball is being fielded.
Turn
Look – at the fielder to see
whether there is another
run.
Look – at the other batsman to
ensure he can run again.
Call – run if yes, stay in ground
if no (see Figure 35).
General Points
If both batsmen start to run it is better to try and get to the other end
than to stop and return to the starting point.
Ensure the bat is run in on its edge and grounded behind the popping
crease before turning for the next run.
Before running for a misfield, ensure that the ball has travelled a
sufficient distance from the fielder to allow a safe run. Having
accepted a run, do not watch the ball when running.

--- Page 22 ---
22
4 Wicket Keeping
There are 2 positions from which to keep wicket.
• Standing back from the wicket.
• Standing up to the wicket.
Standing Back
Method: Position where ball can be taken as it drops between waist
and knee height after bouncing.
Crouch to off side of stumps to get a clear view of ball.
Rise with bounce of ball.
Palms facing ball, little fingers touching.
Hands forward to give as ball is taken.
Eyes level; head as still as possible (see Figure 36).
Figure 36
Standing up to the Wicket – The Stance
Method: Squat down just wide enough to obtain a good view of ball.Safe distance behind stumps so that no part of keeper or
his/her equipment breaks back edge of bowling crease as
ball is taken.
Eyes level, weight on balls of feet.
Backs of fingers resting on ground, palms facing
bowler(see Figure 37).
Figure 37

--- Page 23 ---
23
Standing Up to the Wicket – Taking a Straight Ball
Method: Head and body behind line of ball.
Rise with bounce of ball.
Fingers pointing down.Hands give and elbows clear of body as ball is taken.
Transfer weight to foot nearest stumps to commence
bringing ball towards wicket in case of stumping
opportunity (see Figure 38).
Standing Up to the Wicket – Taking a Wide Offside Ball
Method: Move quickly to offside with outside foot turned in.
Hands on line of ball.
Give with hands.
Transfer weight towards stumps by pushing head towards
them.
Swing arms towards wicket.
Knock bails off if batsman is to be stumped (see Figure
39).
Standing Up to the Wicket – Taking a Legside Ball
Method: Sight and judge ball from normal stance.
Move quickly to leg side.
Transfer weight from left foot which has turned in slightly,
to right.
Take ball just outside line of body.
Push head towards wicket to assist swing of arms to break
wicket if necessary (see Figure 40).
Figure 40Figure 39Figure 38


--- Page 24 ---
24
Standing Up to the Wicket – Taking a Rising Ball
Method: This applies to leg and offside.
Keep gloves on line of ball.
Sway head and body off the line; allow gloves to rise with
ball.
Push head towards stumps to assist arm swing back for
possible stumping (see Figure 41).
Figure 41
Taking Returns From the Field
Method: Move quickly to put the wicket between the ball and the
wicket keeper.
Whenever possible take the ball on the full toss unless this
would mean missing the chance of a run out.
Always try to take the ball in the gloves. Pads are for
protection should the ball be missed; they are not a frontline of defence.
If a fielder is chasing a ball with his back to the wicket
keeper it helps the fielder to sight the keeper as he turns ifa gloved hand is held above the keeper’s head.
Be prepared to remove a glove in order to throw the ball at
the bowler’s wicket if a run out is possible at that end.

--- Page 25 ---
25
UNIT 3
Tactics and Field Placement
It has not been possible to cover these topics in any detail, and again
teachers are referred to more comprehensive texts.
In terms of tactics this section has been sub-divided into key points for
consideration when examining the tactics of the game from the
perspective of the bowler and the batsman.
THE BOWLER
Tactics for Seam Bowlers
Bowl at the wicket or just outside off stump.When attempting to swing the ball, aim to pitch the ball close to the
batsman to encourage front foot strokes, i.e. bowl a full length.
Vary length from time to time so that batsman has to think whether to
play forward or back. Bowl the occasional bouncer.
Encourage dangerous strokes by leaving gaps in the field and pitching the
ball so that it is difficult to hit the ball into those gaps.
Frustrate batsman by bowling to avoid his favourite strokes, e.g. keep
front foot players on the back foot by bowling shorter length balls.
Do not bowl too many variations, e.g. outswinger, inswinger, off cutter,
leg cutter. It is difficult to set fields for a great variety of balls. Do vary
your position on the crease.
If one batsman is poor try to bowl at him most of the time by allowing the
better batsman the opportunity of scoring singles early in the over by
setting the field deeper.
Towards the end of an over do not allow the better batsman a single so
that he faces the next over. Bring the field in to stop the single.
Tactics for Spin Bowlers
Much of the previous section on tactics for seam bowlers applies to spin
bowlers with the addition of the following:
It is essential to bowl a good or even fuller length.
Always try to spin the ball even if the pitch appears unresponsive.
Use the variations sparingly, e.g. floater, arm ball, etc.
Vary pace and flight, i.e. release ball earlier to give a high trajectory and
later to give a low trajectory.
Use width of crease and change from round the wicket to over wicket or
vice versa if necessary.
Adjust field to attack defensive batsman and set field to cut off runs for an
attacking batsman.
If not successful at one end ask to bowl from the other.
THE BATSMAN
Tactics for Batsmen
Batting in cricket not only involves high levels of physical skill, but also
judgemental and decision making skills. The batsman has to make
decisions regarding his reaction to the tactics of the opposition. The
speed of this decision making will be dictated externally, i.e. externallypaced, or influenced by the speed and accuracy of the bowler, the field
placement of the opposition, the stage in the innings, and the stage in the
match. Often players have to make decisions based on anticipatedoutcomes. In other words, the speed of the ball will be too fast for the
human visual system to track, and therefore a player must 
predict  what
will happen and base his/her decision on this judgement. At school levelthe task is easier in terms of the speed of bowlers, but difficult in terms of
the batsman’s experience. The following should act as basic guidelines.

--- Page 26 ---
26
Stroke Selection
Early on, play well pitched up and straight balls between mid-on and mid-
off with straight bat strokes.
Hit bad balls to side that they are swinging or spinning. Do not try to hit
them too hard.
If pitch has variable bounce, do not hook and be on your guard for
‘shooters’.
Pick bat up early, particularly against faster bowlers, so that you have time
to come down on the ball.
Only play defensive strokes to balls which will hit the wicket or which
would otherwise hit you.
An additional judgement must be made following stroke production, and
that is how and when to attempt to score runs.
Scoring Runs
Check the field setting for obvious gaps or fielders set too deep to stop
singles.
Note which fielders are left handed, slow movers, poor throwers.
Be prepared for quick singles, back up when non-striker and run first and
hard.
Relax hands when playing defensive strokes so that the ball does not roll
far from the bat. Fielders may now have to remain close to wicket to
prevent singles. A firm push may now beat the fielder as he is too close to
react to save the single.
If a fielder is dropped back, do not try to hit the ball over him; aim for the
gap he has left or try to hit to another part of the field.
If you are having difficulty scoring off or playing a particular bowler, get
your partner to try to remain facing that bowler as much as possible.
Against spinners, using the feet to get to the pitch or full toss may help to
pierce the field.
Be patient – sooner or later the bowler will bowl a bad ball.
The tactics of both bowler and batsmen will interact with those of the
fielders. It is therefore important that players know how to set fields to
support the teams’ tactical objectives.
Field Setting
Fielders are placed in specific places for two reasons:
• To catch an opponent out• To stop the batsman scoring runs
There are three types of fielding positions:
• Close catchers – slips, gully, short leg etc.
• Fielders saving one run – cover, mid on, square leg etc.
• Boundary fielders stopping boundaries – deep third man, deep fine
leg, long off etc.
Occasionally it may be necessary to place fielders halfway to the
boundary, if it is a very long boundary and the well hit ball will not reachthe normally placed boundary fielder. Alternatively a batsman may be
known to hit a ball regularly to the place where the field is sited.

--- Page 27 ---
27
Guidelines: The faster the bowler, the faster the pitch, the finer the field is
set.
The slower the bowler, the slower the pitch, the straighter and
squarer the field.
Set the field so that good balls are played to the fielders.
If the bowler bowls a lot of bad balls, change the bowler not
the field setting.
Fielders must also be told to move as in Figure 42 below.
• Bowler• Mid-Off
Silly-Mid-Off
•
Silly-Point
•Short-Extra-Cover
•Extra-Cover
•
Cover •
•
Cover Point
•
Short-Third-Man
Deep-Third-Man •
• Deep-Fine-Leg• Long-Leg• Deep-Square-Leg• Deep-Mid-Wicket• Long-On•
Deep-Mid-On•
Deep-Mid-Off•
Long-Off
•
Deep-Extra-Cover
Mid-On •
Mid-Wicket
•
Square-Leg
•Silly-Mid-On
•
Forward-
Short-Leg  •
•
Leg-Slip• Gully
• Wicket-Keeper
• Third-Slip•
Second-SlipFirst-Slip •
Move FinerMove WiderMove Straighter
Move Squarer
Move Backwards• Backward-
Short-Leg
Figure 42
Closer means move towards the batsman.
Deeper means move farther away from the batsman.

--- Page 28 ---
28
UNIT 4
Umpiring
The umpires are the sole judges of all matters concerning the game
once the toss for innings has been made. They decide whether it is fit
or unfit to play, make all decisions regarding the laws and officiallycheck the scores at the end of the game to confirm the result.
The bowling end umpire stands in line with the wickets (see Figure 43)
and makes decisions about the placement of the bowler’s feet for the
fairness of delivery, LBW etc. He may move up to the wicket or back if
requested by the bowler, but he must be in a position to carry out hisfunction.
When a run is being taken, the bowling umpire moves to the same
side of the pitch as the ball and level with the popping crease, to get inthe best position to give a decision for a run out as in the diagram.
The other umpire usually stands level with the popping crease at
square leg (see Figure 44). However, if the sun or fielder interfere withhis view he can stand at Point. His principal function is to give
decisions on stumpings, run outs etc. at the strikers end.
The bowling umpire starts the game by calling 
“Play ”. After six
legitimate balls he calls “Over”;  at the end of play he calls “Time”  and
removes the bails. During the game he gives the following signals tothe scorers to inform them of what is happening. There is no signal
for one or more runs scored from the bat, unless a boundary is
scored. No signal will be given if a batsman is not out on appeal butthe umpire will say 
“Not out”. Umpires communicate their decisions to
both players and spectators through a series of signals (see Table 1).Figure 43 Figure 44Bowling Umpire
Moves to here for run out• Ball struck here
Square Leg UmpirePoint

--- Page 29 ---
29
Table 1:  The Umpire Signals
No-Ball Wide Leg-bye
Bye Six Four. Arm waved.
Dead Ball also called Out Short Run. The number of runs short to be called.
NB the umpire will not allow the game to continue until the scorers
have acknowledged his signal.


--- Page 30 ---
30
UNIT 5
Physical Conditioning for Cricket
The degree of fitness required to play depends upon the level and type
of match played. Generally cricket is played over longer periods of
time than other games; therefore the training has different aspects. Tobe successful it is necessary to have a high skill level, so there must
be a great deal of time spent in skill training.
Before any vigorous activity it is wise to warm up 2/5 minutes’ gentle
jogging, followed by simple stretching exercises.
General Fitness – Aerobic Endurance
Any sustained activity, preferably running, which lasts over 20
minutes.
Cross country over different surfaces – sand, shingle, ploughed fields,
uphill – very useful.
Swimming and cycling may also help.
General Fitness – Anaerobic Endurance
Short bursts of very high energy expenditure, activity lasting 20-40
seconds.
Shuttle running
Fielding shuttles
10 Paces
F
10 Paces
w/k A B15 Paces
w/kF
A
Fielder F runs levels with A to catch thrown ball and returns it to
keeper. F then runs level with B who throws another ball to be caughtand thrown to keeper. Repeat 6 times.A throws ball out. F chases pick up, throws to keeper and returns to
starting point. Repeat 6 times.Examples of fielding shuttles

--- Page 31 ---
31
Figure 45a
Figure 45b
Figure 45c
Figure 46General Fitness – Flexibility or Mobility
All players need to have a good range of movement in all joints. When
fully warmed up or at the end of physical activity, take each limb and
joint to its end position, press and hold for several seconds. Relax andrepeat (see Figures 45 a-c).
Specific Fitness
Analyse each player’s activity to discover what type of training he/she
needs.
1. Batsmen – have to be able to run and turn quickly wearing
equipment.
Suggested Activity :
Shuttles of 5 runs, 20 yards long wearing full
equipment, carrying a bat.
– need to have strong wrists.
Suggested Activities:
Wrist rolling, i. e. winding a weight on a stick up
and down as quickly as possible.
Squeezing grips, squash balls etc.
2. Wicketkeepers – have to move from a squatting position very
quickly.
Suggested Activities:
Hopping, bounding, skipping etc.
Shuttle from squatting position to stumps to
catch a ball and then return to squatting start
position before repeating 6 times.
– have to be able to dive and catch.
Suggested Activity:
Practice from squatting position: run five paces to
side, dive onto mat turning shoulder underneath.
Repeat in opposite direction starting from
squatting position each time (see Figure 46).


--- Page 32 ---
32
3 . Bowlers – need to be fit, flexible, and strong and have a good
recovery rate.
Special attention needs to be paid to warm up and
stretching to prevent injury, particularly to the groin,back and shoulder.
Groin Exercise
Feet astride, bend right knee with left leg straight and
weight pressing inwards.
Change legs (see Figure 47).
Back Exercise
Lie on stomach, hands behind head.
Raise chest off ground (see Figure 48).
Hold a partner in wheelbarrow position; lift him/her in
air. Partner helps by pushing up and arching back (see
Figure 49).
Lie on back; bring right knee up, and then swing to left
to touch ground with knee (see Figure 50).Figure 47
Figure 48
Figure 49
Figure 50


--- Page 33 ---
33
Return to lie on back. Bring left knee up and swing to
right to touch ground.
Return to start position and repeat (see Figure 51).
Bowlers should also do shuttles, bounding, hopping skipping etc. to
strengthen legs.
Shoulder Exercise
Mobility and strength in the
shoulders is essential forbowlers. Arm circles with one
arm forwards and backwards
followed by both arms togetherwill maintain mobility (see
Figure 52).
Standing in pairs, one in bowling
position with arm straight at 45 °
to horizontal, attempts to bringhis/her arm down against
resistance from partner.
Use left and right arms (see
Figure 53).Figure 51
Figure 52
Within the curriculum, physical conditioning should only be included
as part of any lesson, and while it is important that students are fit to
play, the techniques, skills and tactics of the game must take the
majority of time. However, it is important that students understand thetheory underpinning fitness for cricket, and can apply the theory
within examination and project work.Figure 53


--- Page 34 ---
34
UNIT 6
History of Cricket
The origins of cricket are not clearly documented. However, it is clear
that from earliest times people played games which involved strikingan object with a stick. Some of the more interesting or key dates are
listed below. Further details may be obtained by reference to texts
included in 
Recommended Reading.
Earliest Recordings
Date Event or Record
1300 Documented evidence that Prince Edward played a
game called Creag.
1344 A document in the Bodleian Library illustrates a
cricket-like game being played.
The Saxon word “cricce”  or “cric”  (a staff or crooked
stick) may be the origin of the name.
1500 and 1598 Records at Guildford mention “Creckett”  and refer to
playing “crecket and other plaies” .
1611 Chichester Court – two men fined for playing cricket
on Sunday.
1624 The first recorded fatality, when Jasper Vinall died
after having been accidentally struck with a cricket bat.
17th century Some evidence that cricket may have been played in
public schools.
The Start of the Modern Game
1744 The Laws of the game first written down and printed.
1787 The formation of the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC).
1788 The MCC revised the laws.
1864 The modern over arm style of bowling was made legal.The game was further developed following improvements to the
grounds as a result of the use of the “heavy roller”. Additionally,
between 1850-1855 mowing machines were first used.
The latter half of the 19th century was the era of W. G. Grace who,
during his career, made 54,896 runs and took 2,864 wickets. He
retired in 1908.
The History of County Cricket
1787 The first “county” club, Oxfordshire.1853 The first county champions, Nottinghamshire.
NB: At this time the press decided who were the champions.
1890 County Secretaries officially acknowledged the
championships.Test Cricket
1736 Sailors recorded as playing cricket near Lisbon.
1844 First international between USA and Canada.
1859 First tour by England of USA and Canada.
1861-62 First tour of Australia.
1876-77 First test matches played.
1878 Australians travel to England.
1880 First test match played in England.1882 England beaten by Australia at the Oval. 
The Sporting
Times  reported “The body will be cremated and the
ashes taken to Australia”.
1882-83 England beat Australia in Melbourne. Some ladies
burned a bail, sealed the ashes in an urn and gave it to
the English Captain. On his death the ashes were leftto the MCC, and this is the basis of the 
Ashes
competition.
1909 Imperial Cricket Conference established to administer
cricket worldwide.
1965 The name was changed to the International Cricket
Conference.
1968 The Test and County Cricket Board was established to
run test cricket, and the National Cricket Association tofoster interest in coaching and the recreational game.
The MCC administer the Laws both at home and abroad.
All three of the above form the Cricket Council, the governing body of
the sport. There are also the Minor Counties Association, the Irish
Cricket Union, the Scottish Cricket Union and the Welsh Cricket
Association.
1989 The International Cricket Conference renamed the
International Cricket Council.
1992 South Africa re-admited to international cricket.

--- Page 35 ---
35
UNIT 7
The Competitive Structure of the Sport.
The First Class Game
The professional game in Great Britain is run in the form of a league.
Eighteen counties play a mixture of sixteen 3-day and six 4-day
matches regulated by the Test and County Cricket Board. This league
is known as the Britannic Assurance County Championship,  named
after the present sponsors.
The number of counties remained constant since Glamorgan became
a member in 1921 until 1991. Durham became the eighteenthmember in 1992. Unlike football, there is no specific number of teams
which should be in the league. The reason other counties, known as
the Minor Counties, have not become members is the cost of settingup and running a team. A small county such as Worcestershire spent
nearly £900,000 on running theirs in 1989. An additional expensive
problem is the provision of a suitable ground together with thefacilities required for spectators.
Because gates declined in the late fifties, limited-over cricket started
in 1963 with the 
Gillette Cup  competition of 65 overs per side. This
was an instant financial success and was followed by the John Player
League,  40-over matches which commenced on Sunday afternoons in
1969. This was a league competition, the teams playing each otheronce.
The next competition was 
Benson and Hedges, a 55-over game which
was played initially as a regional league with the top two teams going
forward into a knock out competition.
Over the years the sponsors have changed. The Gillette Cup is now a
60-over competition for the Nat West Trophy;  the John Player
competition became the Refuge Assurance League and is now
awaiting a new sponsor.
The international scene has been affected in the same way, with three
One-Day test matches played in addition to five or six, 5-day Test
Matches played against touring teams. Texaco sponsor the One-Daymatches and Cornhill Insurance the 5-day matches.
The Test Matches are staged at Birmingham, Leeds, London,
Manchester and Nottingham. There is no national stadium such asWembley for football. The nearest equivalent is Lord’s, owned by
MCC and the home ground of Middlesex.Recreational Cricket
Recreational or non-professional cricket is organised by the National
Cricket Association.
It has a professional staff at Lord’s and several National Coaches
based in the regions who are responsible for the development of playat all levels, together with the training of coaches. To assist individual
clubs, there are part-time development officers who try to stimulate
interest in coaching, youth development and NCA projects.
Clubs who join NCA can take part in competitions indoors and
outdoors. Individual members may be nominated to play for other
county associations in the 
NCA County Championship  sponsored by
Notts Sport Limited. Outstanding players are invited to play in the NCA
England Amateur Eleven.
Many clubs run youth teams which enter competitions for various age
groups, such as the U13 eight-a-side competition for the Nat West
Bank Ken Barrington Cup.  An U15 competition is for the Sun Life of
Canada Club Cricket Championship.  Texaco sponsor the U16 County
Championship which is contested by the best players selected for
individual county association. Schools cricket is organised by the
English Schools Cricket Association and there is a good liaisonbetween them and the NCA.
League cricket is organised by each individual league which has its
own rules for membership, playing regulations, discipline etc.
The Minor Counties Cricket Association was formed in 1895 to look
after and promote their interests. A minor county is one that does notplay in the First Class Championship. Usually they play 2-day 2-
innings matches as well as taking part in the 
Nat West Knock-out
Competition.
The Women’s Cricket Association is organised on either a county or a
regional area basis, depending on the strength of the game in the
specific area.

--- Page 36 ---
36
UNIT 8
Useful Information
Recommended reading
The Handbook of Cricket, K. V. Andrew ISBN 0 7207 1789 I
The Skills of Cricket, K. V. Andrew ISBN 1 85223 237 4
Cricket – The Techniques of the Game, Andrew, Carter, Lenham
ISBN 0 7158 0574 6 or ISBN 0 7158 0642 4
A History of Cricket, B. Green ISBN 0 7126 2080 X
The MCC Cricket Coaching Book (Fourth Edition)
Wisden Cricketers’ Almanack (Printed Annually)
Test Cricket in Clubs and Schools (Available from NCA)
How to Coach Cricket, R. Dellor
ISBN 0 00 218 319 6 or ISBN 0 00 218 369 2
Games for Cricket Training, A. Oakman ISBN 0 7207 1233 8
The Laws of Cricket (1980 Code) Second Edition 1992.
(Available from MCC, price £1.50)
Useful addresses
E.C.B
Lord’s Cricket GroundLondon
NW8 8QZ
Telephone 0207 432 1200
Coach Education Officec/o Warwickshire County Cricket Ground
Edgbaston
Birmingham
B5 7QXTelephone 0121 440 1748
